# Analytics Engineering Framework - Data Model
[Analytics engineers](https://www.getdbt.com/what-is-analytics-engineering) transform, test, deploy, and document data using software engineering principles, providing clean datasets that empower end users to independently answer their own questions.

This opininated reference Data Model management repository is a key component of a robust analytics environment, establishing a well-structured system to manage your data models, schemas, Dataplex lakes and zones, and data definition language (DDL) statements. It leverages Dataform to seamlessly integrate these elements, supporting lakehouse, data lake, and data mesh architectures.

### Key Features & Concepts
This repository is your central hub for streamlined data model definition, governance, and collaboration.  Here's what it offers:

- **Data Modeling and Schema Management:** Create and maintain robust data models and schemas to ensure data integrity and consistency across your pipelines.
- **Dataplex Integration:** Seamlessly organize and govern your data lake and warehouse environments using Google Cloud Dataplex's powerful features:
  - **Lakes and Zones:** Structure your data logically for easy management.
  - **Governance Rules:** Enforce data quality, security, and compliance standards.
  - **Metadata Management:** Enrich data understanding with tags, taxonomies, and business glossaries.
- **DDL Management:** Define your table structures (CREATE TABLE, etc.) using standard SQL Data Definition Language (DDL) directly within this repository.

- **Dataform Integration:**  Leverage Dataform to deploy and maintain your table definitions flexibly across lakehouse, data lake, and data mesh architectures.

- **Collaboration:**  Foster a shared understanding of data structures and their context across teams, promoting transparency and effective data-driven decision-making.



### Folder Structure
- **terraform**:
  - `main.tf`:
    - Creates BigQuery datasets based on what you give as parameters i.e. (landing, curated, and exposure). 
    - Generates a `dataform.json` file that provides parameters to reference the Terraform-created datasets during Dataform operations.
  - `prod.tfvars`:
    - Set your base project, for the core resources.
    - Define your datasets.
```
└── terraform
│   ├── prod.tfvars
│   ├── locals.tf
│   ├── variables.tf
│   ├── output.tf
│   └── main.tf
```
- **dataform:**
  - Houses your table definitions using a structure recommended for Dataform repositories.
  - Subfolders organized by Dataplex lakes and zones for clear structure.
  - The `dataform.json` file, generated by Terraform, provides parameters to reference the Terraform-created infrastructure during Dataform operations.
```
├── dataform
│   └── definitions
│   │    └── sample-dataplex-lake
│   │        ├── sample-dataplex-zone
│   │        └── ...
│   └── dataform.json (auto generated when running terraform apply)

```
- **dataplex:**
  - Logic to understand the Dataform folder structure and create/register Dataplex lakes and zones accordingly.
  - Defines tag templates, policy tags, and governance rules to be applied to Dataform-defined tables.
```
└── dataplex
│   ├── lakes.yaml
│   └── zones.yaml
```

### Usage
#### Steps
1. **Terraform:** Modify the Terraform `prod.tfvars` setting your base project details and defining the datasets that will be created.
1. **Dataform:** Add your table definitions to the dataform folder.
1. **Dataplex:** Define tagging and governance rules in the dataplex folder.
1. Run the Terraformn Plan / Apply
```commandline
terraform plan -var-file="prod.tfvars"
```

## Integration with Analytics Engineering Framework

This opininated Data Model management repository is designed as a component of a comprehensive Analytics Engineering Framework comprised of:

1. Analytics Engineering Framework - Data Orchestration: Automates the generation of Google Cloud Workflows Definition files.
1. Analytics Engineering Framework - Orchestration Framework: Seamlessly deploy your orchestration infrastructure.
1. Analytics Engineering Framework - Data Transformation: Houses your data transformation logic.
1. Analytics Engineering Framework - Data Model: Manages data models, schemas and Dataplex lakes and zones.

## Demo Mode Apendix
In case you want to create some sample data sources (GCS bucket with some files, and a Cloud SQL Postgres DB with 1 populated table) run the terraform in `DEMO` mode by following the next steps:

### Folder Structure
- **terraform**:
  - `main.tf`: 
    - Creates a BigLake connection for GCS files.
  - `gcs.tf`:
    - Creates data landing GCS buckets. And uploads sample data.
  - `fake_on_prem_db.tf`:
    - Creates a dummy PostgreSQL database to simulate an on-premises data source that can't be accessed using BigQuery Omni or BigLake. And inserts sample data.
  - `demo.tfvars`:
    - Set your base project, for the core resources.
    - Define your datasets.
```
└── terraform
│   ├── ...
│   ├── demo.tfvars
│   ├── gcs.tf
│   └── fake_on_prem_db.tf
```

- **sample-data:**
  - Contains sample data to be inserted into the dummy on-premises database.
  - Contains sample files to be located in the landing GCS bucket and accessed with BigQuery BigLake.
```
├── sample-data
│   ├── fake-on-prem-postgresql
│   │   ├── sample_db_populator.sql
│   │   └── cleanup_db.sql
│   └── gcs_files
│       ├── sample_file.csv
│       └── ...
```

### Usage
**Important:** Using this repository involves creating tables and managing data. We've included simple data and tables for demonstration.

#### Steps
1. **Terraform:** Modify the Terraform `demo.tfvars` setting your base project details, the datasets that will be created and the sample files and the sample bucket to be created.
1. **Dataform:** Add your table definitions to the dataform folder.
1. **Dataplex:** Define tagging and governance rules in the dataplex folder.
1. Run the Terraformn Plan / Apply
```commandline
terraform plan -var-file="demo.tfvars"
```
